The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Yellow Wallpaper
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
