The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysterious Affair at Styles
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mysterious Affair at Styles


Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: March 1, 1997 [eBook #863]
                Most recently updated: December 26, 2021

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES ***




The Mysterious Affair at Styles

by Agatha Christie

Contents


CHAPTER I. I GO TO STYLES
CHAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY
CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY
CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES
CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”
CHAPTER VI. THE INQUEST
CHAPTER VII. POIROT PAYS HIS DEBTS
CHAPTER VIII. FRESH SUSPICIONS
CHAPTER IX. DR. BAUERSTEIN
CHAPTER X. THE ARREST
CHAPTER XI. THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTION
CHAPTER XII. THE LAST LINK
CHAPTER XIII. POIROT EXPLAINS




CHAPTER I.
I GO TO STYLES


The intense interest aroused in the public by what was known at the
time as “The Styles Case” has now somewhat subsided. Nevertheless, in
view of the world-wide notoriety which attended it, I have been asked,
both by my friend Poirot and the family themselves, to write an account
of the whole story. This, we trust, will effectually silence the
sensational rumours which still persist.

I will therefore briefly set down the circumstances which led to my
being connected with the affair.

I had been invalided home from the Front; and, after spending some
months in a rather depressing Convalescent Home, was given a month’s
sick leave. Having no near relations or friends, I was trying to make
up my mind what to do, when I ran across John Cavendish. I had seen
very little of him for some years. Indeed, I had never known him
particularly well. He was a good fifteen years my senior, for one
thing, though he hardly looked his forty-five years. As a boy, though,
I had often stayed at Styles, his mother’s place in Essex.

We had a good yarn about old times, and it ended in his inviting me
down to Styles to spend my leave there.

“The mater will be delighted to see you again—after all those years,”
he added.

“Your mother keeps well?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. I suppose you know that she has married again?”

I am afraid I showed my surprise rather plainly. Mrs. Cavendish, who
had married John’s father when he was a widower with two sons, had been
a handsome woman of middle-age as I remembered her. She certainly could
not be a day less than seventy now. I recalled her as an energetic,
autocratic personality, somewhat inclined to charitable and social
notoriety, with a fondness for opening bazaars and playing the Lady
Bountiful. She was a most generous woman, and possessed a considerable
fortune of her own.

Their country-place, Styles Court, had been purchased by Mr. Cavendish
early in their married life. He had been completely under his wife’s
ascendancy, so much so that, on dying, he left the place to her for her
lifetime, as well as the larger part of his income; an arrangement that
was distinctly unfair to his two sons. Their step-mother, however, had
always been most generous to them; indeed, they were so young at the
time of their father’s remarriage that they always thought of her as
their own mother.

Lawrence, the younger, had been a delicate youth. He had qualified as a
doctor but early relinquished the profession of medicine, and lived at
home while pursuing literary ambitions; though his verses never had any
marked success.

John practised for some time as a barrister, but had finally settled
down to the more congenial life of a country squire. He had married two
years ago, and had taken his wife to live at Styles, though I
entertained a shrewd suspicion that he would have preferred his mother
to increase his allowance, which would have enabled him to have a home
of his own. Mrs. Cavendish, however, was a lady who liked to make her
own plans, and expected other people to fall in with them, and in this
case she certainly had the whip hand, namely: the purse strings.

John noticed my surprise at the news of his mother’s remarriage and
smiled rather ruefully.

“Rotten little bounder too!” he said savagely. “I can tell you,
Hastings, it’s making life jolly difficult for us. As for Evie—you
remember Evie?”

“No.”

“Oh, I suppose she was after your time. She’s the mater’s factotum,
companion, Jack of all trades! A great sport—old Evie! Not precisely
young and beautiful, but as game as they make them.”

“You were going to say——?”

“Oh, this fellow! He turned up from nowhere, on the pretext of being a
second cousin or something of Evie’s, though she didn’t seem
particularly keen to acknowledge the relationship. The fellow is an
absolute outsider, anyone can see that. He’s got a great black beard,
and wears patent leather boots in all weathers! But the mater cottoned
to him at once, took him on as secretary—you know how she’s always
running a hundred societies?”

I nodded.

“Well, of course the war has turned the hundreds into thousands. No
doubt the fellow was very useful to her. But you could have knocked us
all down with a feather when, three months ago, she suddenly announced
that she and Alfred were engaged! The fellow must be at least twenty
years younger than she is! It’s simply bare-faced fortune hunting; but
there you are—she is her own mistress, and she’s married him.”

“It must be a difficult situation for you all.”

“Difficult! It’s damnable!”

Thus it came about that, three days later, I descended from the train
at Styles St. Mary, an absurd little station, with no apparent reason
for existence, perched up in the midst of green fields and country
lanes. John Cavendish was waiting on the platform, and piloted me out
to the car.

“Got a drop or two of petrol still, you see,” he remarked. “Mainly
owing to the mater’s activities.”

The village of Styles St. Mary was situated about two miles from the
little station, and Styles Court lay a mile the other side of it. It
was a still, warm day in early July. As one looked out over the flat
Essex country, lying so green and peaceful under the afternoon sun, it
seemed almost impossible to believe that, not so very far away, a great
war was running its appointed course. I felt I had suddenly strayed
into another world. As we turned in at the lodge gates, John said:

“I’m afraid you’ll find it very quiet down here, Hastings.”

“My dear fellow, that’s just what I want.”

“Oh, it’s pleasant enough if you want to lead the idle life. I drill
with the volunteers twice a week, and lend a hand at the farms. My wife
works regularly ‘on the land’. She is up at five every morning to milk,
and keeps at it steadily until lunchtime. It’s a jolly good life taking
it all round—if it weren’t for that fellow Alfred Inglethorp!” He
checked the car suddenly, and glanced at his watch. “I wonder if we’ve
time to pick up Cynthia. No, she’ll have started from the hospital by
now.”

“Cynthia! That’s not your wife?”

“No, Cynthia is a protégée of my mother’s, the daughter of an old
schoolfellow of hers, who married a rascally solicitor. He came a
cropper, and the girl was left an orphan and penniless. My mother came
to the rescue, and Cynthia has been with us nearly two years now. She
works in the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster, seven miles away.”

As he spoke the last words, we drew up in front of the fine old house.
A lady in a stout tweed skirt, who was bending over a flower bed,
straightened herself at our approach.

“Hullo, Evie, here’s our wounded hero! Mr. Hastings—Miss Howard.”

Miss Howard shook hands with a hearty, almost painful, grip. I had an
impression of very blue eyes in a sunburnt face. She was a
pleasant-looking woman of about forty, with a deep voice, almost manly
in its stentorian tones, and had a large sensible square body, with
feet to match—these last encased in good thick boots. Her conversation,
I soon found, was couched in the telegraphic style.

“Weeds grow like house afire. Can’t keep even with ’em. Shall press you
in. Better be careful.”

“I’m sure I shall be only too delighted to make myself useful,” I
responded.

“Don’t say it. Never does. Wish you hadn’t later.”

“You’re a cynic, Evie,” said John, laughing. “Where’s tea to-day—inside
or out?”

“Out. Too fine a day to be cooped up in the house.”

“Come on then, you’ve done enough gardening for to-day. ‘The labourer
is worthy of his hire’, you know. Come and be refreshed.”

“Well,” said Miss Howard, drawing off her gardening gloves, “I’m
inclined to agree with you.”

She led the way round the house to where tea was spread under the shade
of a large sycamore.

A figure rose from one of the basket chairs, and came a few steps to
meet us.

“My wife, Hastings,” said John.

I shall never forget my first sight of Mary Cavendish. Her tall,
slender form, outlined against the bright light; the vivid sense of
slumbering fire that seemed to find expression only in those wonderful
tawny eyes of hers, remarkable eyes, different from any other woman’s
that I have ever known; the intense power of stillness she possessed,
which nevertheless conveyed the impression of a wild untamed spirit in
an exquisitely civilised body—all these things are burnt into my
memory. I shall never forget them.

She greeted me with a few words of pleasant welcome in a low clear
voice, and I sank into a basket chair feeling distinctly glad that I
had accepted John’s invitation. Mrs. Cavendish gave me some tea, and
her few quiet remarks heightened my first impression of her as a
thoroughly fascinating woman. An appreciative listener is always
stimulating, and I described, in a humorous manner, certain incidents
of my Convalescent Home, in a way which, I flatter myself, greatly
amused my hostess. John, of course, good fellow though he is, could
hardly be called a brilliant conversationalist.

At that moment a well remembered voice floated through the open French
window near at hand:

“Then you’ll write to the Princess after tea, Alfred? I’ll write to
Lady Tadminster for the second day, myself. Or shall we wait until we
hear from the Princess? In case of a refusal, Lady Tadminster might
open it the first day, and Mrs. Crosbie the second. Then there’s the
Duchess—about the school fête.”

There was the murmur of a man’s voice, and then Mrs. Inglethorp’s rose
in reply:

“Yes, certainly. After tea will do quite well. You are so thoughtful,
Alfred dear.”

The French window swung open a little wider, and a handsome
white-haired old lady, with a somewhat masterful cast of features,
stepped out of it on to the lawn. A man followed her, a suggestion of
deference in his manner.

Mrs. Inglethorp greeted me with effusion.

“Why, if it isn’t too delightful to see you again, Mr. Hastings, after
all these years. Alfred, darling, Mr. Hastings—my husband.”

I looked with some curiosity at “Alfred darling”. He certainly struck a
rather alien note. I did not wonder at John objecting to his beard. It
was one of the longest and blackest I have ever seen. He wore
gold-rimmed pince-nez, and had a curious impassivity of feature. It
struck me that he might look natural on a stage, but was strangely out
of place in real life. His voice was rather deep and unctuous. He
placed a wooden hand in mine and said:

“This is a pleasure, Mr. Hastings.” Then, turning to his wife: “Emily
dearest, I think that cushion is a little damp.”

She beamed fondly on him, as he substituted another with every
demonstration of the tenderest care. Strange infatuation of an
otherwise sensible woman!

With the presence of Mr. Inglethorp, a sense of constraint and veiled
hostility seemed to settle down upon the company. Miss Howard, in
particular, took no pains to conceal her feelings. Mrs. Inglethorp,
however, seemed to notice nothing unusual. Her volubility, which I
remembered of old, had lost nothing in the intervening years, and she
poured out a steady flood of conversation, mainly on the subject of the
forthcoming bazaar which she was organizing and which was to take place
shortly. Occasionally she referred to her husband over a question of
days or dates. His watchful and attentive manner never varied. From the
very first I took a firm and rooted dislike to him, and I flatter
myself that my first judgments are usually fairly shrewd.

Presently Mrs. Inglethorp turned to give some instructions about
letters to Evelyn Howard, and her husband addressed me in his
painstaking voice:

“Is soldiering your regular profession, Mr. Hastings?”